This thesis introduced McIDE, a \matlab IDE powered by the \mclab compiler
toolkit, and with a focus on powering features through exploiting runtime
information rather than relying solely on static analysis. We provided an
overview of McIDE's design, which consists of largely independent components
wired together through a thin browser-based graphical interface. We described
our dynamic call graph collection mechanism, and the analyses and optimizations
we implemented to minimize the performance overhead of the instrumented code.
We presented a technique for performing code transformations in a
layout-preserving fashion, which allows McIDE to provide some usable automated
refactorings out of the box, and future refactoring implementers to reuse the
transformation infrastructure to do the same. Finally, we described \matlab's
dynamic features in detail and presented a study of their usage in the wild.

\section{Future Work}

We present here some ideas for possible further work for the continued
development of McIDE. The common thread is finding more useful ways to exploit
runtime information.

\begin{description}

\item[Dynamic feature elimination] The dynamic feature survey we conducted
pointed to a few patterns where dynamic code could easily be rewritten using
more static analysis friendly constructs. It may be hard to do this in
general, but one could tackle the problem of replace the array-like uses of
\code{eval} with straightforward loops, or eliminating uses of \code{cd}
where the aim is only to refer to data to be loaded from the filesystem.

Making code more ameanable to static analysis would also make it more suitable
as input to static backends of the \mclab toolkit, which operate on the \matlab
subset supported by the \matlab Tamer, which rules out features like
\code{eval}. If static compilation is a goal for the user, then more work is
this vein could help compatibility along.

\item[Dynamic code visualizations] IDEs are in a position to provide alternate
perspectives on the code beyond the traditional file explorer view, and runtime
information could be particularly useful in this setting.

As low hanging fruit, the call graph information described in this thesis could
be used to show execution stack traces as a tree and enable jumping directly to
any function invoked along the way.

Relevant runtime information could be overlaid onto source code in order to aid
program understanding -- expressions could be annotated with runtime types (or
even values), perhaps via tooltips or comments introduced into the code if
requested; lines of code could be annotated with timing information, for
instance by coloring bottlenecks differently as to make them stand out; the
profiling machinery could work backwards from errors in the execution to
highlight the problematic code paths.

\end{description}
